## Motivation
 
Temporal logics have a long history [@konur2010].
One of the most influential formalisms
is Linear Temporal Logic (LTL) [@pnueli77],
which has been applied for
program specification and verification.
The variant with finite trace semantics, LTLf,
has been introduced in [@degiacomo2013].

Linear Dynamic Logic (LDL) [@vardi2011rise;]
is the extension of LTL with regular expressions (RE).
The idea behind LDL is to have a formalism that merges
the declarativeness and convenience of LTL,
as expressive as star-free RE,
with the expressive power of RE. 
The variant over finite traces, LDLf, has been proposed in [@degiacomo2013].
The syntax that naturally supports
empty traces has been employed in [@brafman2018] for LTLf/LDLf.

Recently, a finite trace variant has been proposed also for
the pure-past versions of LTLf and LDLf, namely
Pure-Past Linear Temporal Logic (PLTLf) and
Pure-Past Linear Dynamic Logic (PLDLf) [@degiacomo2020].

The topic has gained 
more and more attention both in academia and industry,
also because 
such logics have been considered compelling 
from a practical point of view. 
Among areas of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence,
we encounter reactive synthesis [@degiacomo2015],
model checking [@clarke1986],
planning with temporal goal [@bacchus1998planning],
theory of Markov Decision Process with non-Markovian rewards
[@bacchus1996rewarding],
business processes specification
[@pevsic2010enacting], just to name a few.
For what concerns industry applications,
Intel proposed the industrial linear time 
specification language  `ForSpec` [@armoni2002forspec],
and the IEEE association standardized the
_Property Specification Language_ (PSL) [@ieee2010].
Both standards
witness the need of specifications based
on LTL and regular expressions.
Also, the research community has proposed a plethora of
software tools and libraries to handle LTL and/or LDL formulas 
for a variety of purposes:
`Spot` [@duret2016spot;@duret2016spotb],
`Owl` [@owl2018],
`SPIN` [@holzmann2011]
for the infinite-trace semantics,
and 
`Syft` [@Zhu_2017],
`Lisa` [@bansal2020hybrid],
`FLLOAT` [@flloat2015;@favorito2018reinforcement],
`LTLf2DFA` [@fuggitti_whitemechltlf2dfa_2018],
`Lydia` [@degiacomo2021compositional]
for the finite trace setting.
Another related work is represented by
TLSF v1.1 [@jacobs2016high],
although its focus is on a format for LTL synthesis problems.

All these tools and formats assume the input formulae to be
written in a certain grammar.
Unfortunately, as often happens when dealing with parser implementations
with lack of coordination,
the grammars to represent the formulae 
have some form of discrepancies; e.g.
different alternative ways to denote 
boolean conjunctions or temporal operators,
different lexical rules to describe the allowed
atomic propositions or boolean constants,
underspecifications on how to handle 
special characters (linefeed, tab, newline, etc.),
how to handle associativity of the operators.

### Goals

To enhance interoperability between the aforementioned tools,
this document proposes a standard grammar
for writing temporal logic formulae.
In particular, we specify grammars for:

- Linear Temporal Logic on finite traces (LTLf)
- Linear Dynamic Logic on finite traces (LDLf)
- Past Linear Temporal Logic on finite traces (PLTLf)
- Past Linear Dynamic Logic on finite traces (PLDLf)

Note that, despite the syntax is very similar between
the finite trace and the infinite trace variants, it 
is not the same for some operators. For instance, in LTL there is no 
_weak next_ operator, wheras in LTLf it is the dual operator
(under negation) of the _next_ operator.

We would like this standard to be:

- An _open_ standard, fostering collaboration and contributions from 
  the research community;
- As much compliant as possible to existing and widely used tools;
- Written by researchers, for researchers. In other words, 
  this is not strictly tight to industrial needs; for instance,
  we deliberately dropped the modeling of multiple clock 
  and reset signals of `ForSpec` and `PSL`, as these are constructs
  not relevant for domains outside formal verification.
- Tool-agnostic. Often, grammars are reported alongside
  software manuals and descriptions. Instead, our 
  aim is to propose a common denominator for
  all the grammars in use.


### Notation

We describe the syntax in Extended Backus-Naur Form (EBNF) [@backus1959syntax].
We follow the notation used for the 
specification of XML [@xml]; we discarded
the EBNF standard version ISO/IEC 14977 [@iso1996iso], 
as it has been often rejected by the community 
of those who write language specifications 
for a variety of reasons [@david_dont_2020;@zaytsev2012bnf].

### Normative

We refer to [@bradner1997key] 
for requirement level key words.
We also refer to
Unicode standard [@ISOUNICODE;@unicode2020]
to define legal characters.
For versioning this standard, we
use SemVerDocs [@tekampe_semantic_nodate],
inspired by SemVer [@preston-werner_semantic_nodate]. 

